from the howard hughes medical institute
the two thousand five holiday lectures
on science
this year's lectures evolution
constant change and common threads
will be given by doctor shaundy carol
howard hughes medical institute
investigator at the university of
wisconsin madison
and doctor david m kingsley
howard hughes medical institute
investigators at stanford university
school of medicine
the third lecture is titled fossils
jeans and andrea
and now to introduce our program
the president of the howard hughes
medical institute
doctor thomas check
good morning and welcome back to the
howard hughes medical institute
and to the two thousand and five holiday
lectures on science evolution
constant change and common threads
in his last lecture david kingsley
talked about domestication of wolves
into dogs and have to your sent a into
court
today he's going to delve deeper into
evolutionary time and show us about how
genetic changes in living populations
today related changes that we see in the
fossil record
now david primarily studies fish but the
rules and mechanisms that he has
uncovered have broad implications for
the evolution of all kinds of species
including humans
one of the surprising things today that
has discovered
is that evolution appears to be a great
recycler using the same mechanisms over
and over again
the talk is entitled
fossils jeans and embryos
and now
here's a video
of david at work
for me why when in the science and one
of the most
warden things about it
is
the rare opportunity
ticket to spend your life
solving problems
or a study in question
that people have wondered about four
thousands here
markets inc
we live right now at a time
win
the techniques are available
to picket any problem the tree
interested
and
chisels get to be
the one who solves
uh... some age-old probable cars and
that's i think a fairly unusual
opportunity but for a long time the
problems were solved because the methods
were unavailable for work
what's different now is that the methods
are available to work on them so i think
hundred years from now
people will look back and say that must
have been incredible time to be doing
science
the methods for their
or you had to do
picked the problem you're interested in
and go apply the methods
uh...
what could be more exciting
to live in that sliver of time
win wonderful unsolved problems are
solvable i'll buy the applications so
methods that have work repeatedly in
others
there's no other job in the world where
it you can have that privilege of
getting to spend your time
trying to figure out how things work
so i think it's important for students
not to decide whether they like science
based just on the way scientists and
presented to me in in a few classes so
if you can find some way
into a land
or too
interact with
scientists doing science
that it's the best possible way to see
the difference between the problem
solving scientist really do
and the way it strongly are presented in
the classroom there's a big difference
between memorizing the word six point
which is an effort to inspite and i
think
that people have to leave
pass that nomenclature uh... asked that
and did into
eleven twelve
where
they can actually
could be confronted with the problem
with the answer is that no but don't
know my students
try to find
welcome back everybody
yesterday how we saw
selection by humans
uh... has transformed
plants and animals into of those
modern form so we see around us today
darwin and wallace are both realized
that the same principles of selection
that are so dramatically are change book
plants and animals a hundred
domestication
should also act in nature
so wild plants and animals of dairy in
all directions
the differences are inherited
many more individuals are produced in
compulsively survive and reproduce so
that creates a competitive situation
they will vary in swollen ever pletely
more offspring and these laws of nature
create a process of natural selection
that will extensively modified organisms
over time
so based on these laws burn proposed
that modern plants and animals are
really just the youngest sprouts and
twigs
of an immense an ancient uh...
tree of life
and that all organisms
that have ever lived may be related by
dissent with modification
extending back to the very earliest
stages of away from her
i think is obviously a profound
intellectual uh... leap it's always
struck me as large as the lead on that
was made by newton maybe no newton how
he signed apple falling in his backyard
and and realized
that the same forces of gravity that
control objects falling in his backyard
might also control the falling
of the moon around the earth
the orbiting of the birth ran the sign
in fact the principles that constructing
tire solar system
so newton scope for physics was
incredible
from apples to orbits from his backyard
to the entire solar system
i think darwin's our book had a similar
breathtaking scope
from up pigeons in his backyard
in the very first chapter of the origin
of species
this immense tree of life that connects
all living former spy modification by
dissent
uh... by the final chapter of the origin
okay so when in eighteen fifty nine when
burns great theory was proposed
it already explained all sorts of
confusing data from different uh...
areas
including todd tax from biogeography
though uh... the existence of closely
related organisms and island groups
unlike the cooper toast
facts from paleontology like the fact
that on modern mammals are only found in
the most recent fossil strata
fax from embryology
common structures are seen embryos of
animals that look very different from
each other
and unusual facts from morphology
so comparative anatomy is had known for
a long time
that some structures existed in animals
that were very hard to explain under the
prevailing idea that
each species
had been intelligently designed from
optimally match uh... it's its own
environment
for example
lots of animals that live in caves
never see light
they have no reason to have allies
and yet lots of caving animals
have this did you lines
so i think in the form they form in the
degenerating
where they form but they're completely
covered by skin
so these are non-functional organs in an
environment were eyes aren't needed
very hard to imagine why there they
repeat organism was designed live in a
case
but easy to explain
current blind animals evolved from
precursors that used to see
so dissent with modification
explains the structures as a vestige a
leftover from their common ancestry
although art
darwin's theory to explain lots of to
your facts that existed in eighteen
fifty nine
it also uh... set off a whole series of
raging debate about all sorts of uh...
other issues
many scientists believe that earth was
too young
uh... to be compatible with darwin's
theory of evolution when it was
published in eighteen fifty nine
there was an absence of transitional
forms
that darman predicted should be all over
the place hot in the fossil record
many people thought natural selection
couldn't work the way darwin proposed
because in the rare variants that
occurred
i would get swamped out by a form of
blending inheritance that will come back
from the second
and finally many people despondent and
we thought
that animals look too different from
each other to a possibly com
uh... from common ancestors
so all of these issues were extensively
i've debated underneath burns lifetime
he tried to address them in subsequent
issues of the origin of species but in
fact many of them were resolved
uh... for decades
let's come back and not talk about uh...
about uh... each of these uh... kiki
problems
how about the age of the earth
the age of the earth has been calculated
in lots of different ways
there's a famous calculation by
archbishop usher in the sixteen hundreds
the creation of occurred on october
twenty third four thousand four bc
that estimate was based on our genealogy
in the bible
so in the eighteen hundreds there was
already accumulated geological evidence
that the earth must be are much older
than them
one of darwin's contemporaries was a
famous physicist on named lord kelvin
i think i've ever heard of uh... calvin
right this is the calvin and the second
lobstermen dynamics
this is also the calvin of the absolute
temperature scale
so that uh... degrees are named after
her power
lord kelvin won the most famous
physicists of of the eighteen hundreds
so calvin calculated are that the first
couldn't be older then uh...
the return sun i had a maximum age of
forty million years
that was the based on the physics of the
cooling of the earth inside
that estimate barton bothered down a lot
because darman an estimated in the
origin that it might take hundreds of
millions of years
operatives process of dissent with
modification to generate by this immense
tree of life
darman wanted four hundred million years
tenfold more other
fourth kelvin thought was physically
possible
to this debate i was actually are
resolved by an amazing series of
discoveries in twentieth century physics
that darwin didn't live to see
ites nine realized in the early
twentieth century that energy in master
actually you know convertible his famous
equation equals m_c_ squared he for
energy and him for mass
detailed measurements of the actual
massive anand shows that for hydrogen
atoms actually slightly more
then one helium atom
and the way the sun actually shines his
app process of uh... fusion energy
so four hydrogen atoms were fused
together to make one helium the small a
bit of excess mast is converted into
energy
so the sun is a nuclear furnace not the
kind of conventional furnace
of that calvin had model
uh... in the eighteen hundreds
you can actually major the amount of
hydrogen helium in the sun
and calculate how old the sun must be
based on how that nuclear furnace
similarly around the turn of the century
radioactivity was discovered for the
first time
so that by actually provided a new
source of heat within rocks in it also
provided a brand new way to calculate
the absolute age approx
detailed art measurements uh... from
both the physics of stars
and a half life of radioactive decay
show that the earth in the solar system
or billions of years old
not millions of years old so hundred
times longer
then our lord kelvin had estimated
uh... during the debates with darwin
so when darwin said that an infinite
number of generations which the mein
kampf grasp must have succeeded each
other
in the long role of yours
he was even more right
than we thought at the time
they have out by the fossil record
well fossa record has always been
imperfect
don't worried about this in the origin
beginning as soon as the organ was
published lots of interesting fossil
started to be published in that's been
true ever since
uh... in eighteen sixty one
two years after uh... the origin
appeared a spectacular fossil or was
found this was the first of several
archaeopteryx fossil
remarkable preservation of
uh... feather structures
in an ancient reptiles so archaeopteryx
has traits of both birds reptiles
you can see feathers but it's one uh...
an ancient reptile but still has teeth
structures that are in normally never
found in modern birds
this kind of fossil with a mixture of
trade two different organisms
exactly the kind of fossil of the
darwin's theory of the stock market
cation predicted must exist
well keep awful discoveries
have kept being made ever sense of the
origin
one of the biggest gaps in the fossil
record the darwin worried a lot about
was the complete absence of any known
possibles yun opry came rian strat
so the fossil record as darwin knew it
the first uh... appearance apostle life
in in the uh... in the record at that
time
by the time the possible pure they were
already complex and diverse
no record of uh... simple forms the
darman i'll propose must exist at the
base of uh... his immense tree of life
since the origin of fossil evidence of
life on earth uh... has been pushed back
and spectacular ways
possible so simple single celled
organisms have now been confirmed in
rocks are that are billion years
billions of years old times from there
in the figure at the top
just as darman predicted
early forms of life for much simpler
then neidhart complex like the team
later
wind fatherly fossil record looks like
maps of bacteria
cyanobacteria and single celled
micro-organisms
similar italy since eighteen fifty nine
the earliest forms of multi-site life
have also been found in the fossil
record
these also occur in rocks that pre-date
the explosion of more complex forms spot
in the cambridge
eunice i get a life
in billions of years old rocks the
release forms of multi sailor life in
pre-k marine rocks
ambition
many transitional fossils have been down
hotmail been found for higher animal
groups
so it still much later in the fossil
record and talk about
uh... the reinvention of water
uh... by mail mls
we're used to think you numbered
addresses as land animals was skeletal
structures that are appropriate for are
walking around on two or four legs on
land
most mammals that's true but in fact
some mammals are found in the ocean as
aquatic organisms
they have streamlined bodies such as
seen here uh... in a manatee
so manatees have a streamlined body they
still have to four fans were or flippers
but they no longer have heinbuch
right so i mean they also have a series
of other aquatic adaptations
nostrils that are located high up on the
head for breeding uh... at uh... at the
water air interface
very unusual downturn dog jaw as their
only seen in manatees and of course
related or animal called duke gardens
unusual rios so most animals have ribs
that are hollow filled with a bone
marrow
in manatees and do burns the ribs are
actually solid they're filled with bone
that's not to serve as a form of ballast
offer these marine creatures
and finally in addition to those are
teachers manatee shows some
characteristics that suggest they may
have a vault on from uh... land animals
that includes both toenails on the
flippers
and obvious the jewel hind limbs
so this shows a blow-up of the manatee
flipper lucian at ends are
these toenail
was very unusual to toenails are usually
only found on our land animals this was
all recognize more time ago
that amenities toenails actually look
very much like elephant toenails
d_n_a_ studies show that of the d_n_a_
of manatees in the d_n_a_ of elephants
and more closely related and almost
other mammals
so it looks like
uh... these may have evolved from are
four-legged creature
in addition although manatees don't have
hind limbs if you look at their skeleton
they do have a tiny rudimentary public
bones were a hind limb
uh... would normally be found
it is art to catch them vertebral column
they can support weight there's no way
that comes off of the pelvis
surprisingly
those are rudimentary are pelvic bones
to do still have a tiny hip socket even
though the femur isn't there
they actually have a manatee bonaparte
appear hot at the front and invite you
to come up during the break
this is a small rudimentary paulus of
manatee
you see a little circle here
this is a a two-stage orthop socket
for a ghost femur
that's no longer that's no longer there
again
that's a just like the the schedule
eisen cave organisms
the example of a kind of structure
that's very hard to explain that
manatees have been designed up from
scratch
to uh... to live in the ocean
and the other hand
those kind of structures are easy to
explain if manatees actually walt
from four lated are up for later
precursors
well if manatees of all time for liggett
land animals where are the suppose
apostles
of are intermediate forms
the fossils are actually in jamaica
uh... variation paper that was published
uh... in two thousand one by dr darling
from the howard university here in
washington d_c_ area
he described the spectacular fossil it
was found in fifteen million year old
deposits on in jamaica
this are nearly complete skeleton shows
all sorts of art characteristic
diagnostic manatee features including
the nostrils uh... up on the top of the
head
characteristics solid ballast
like ribs
the unusual downturn jaws that are only
found in manatees in dupont
despite having all these features it has
another a very interesting feature
it still has time
so the hind limbs are president and they
look just as robust as the poor lips
exactly the kind organism
for evolving manatees from of previous
how poorly good uh... ancestor
other intermediate stages in public
reduction i have been found for this
group
manatees and do bones belong to a group
called the saving and other kota saving
apostles have been shown that show
intermediate stages of hinman reduction
here's a possibly conceive
the hind limbs or president but they're
now much smaller than the four limbs
still have the pelvis the femur and
lower leg bones
so we have now i'll fossil record that
goes all the way from a complete
four-legged looking manatee at the kinds
that have intermediate public production
and then the simple thus the jewel
pelvis that still found are in the month
forms
the other are a group of marine mammals
that's known
participation of the whales in the
dolphins we actually have alive
dolphin skeleton here at the front of
the auditorium
the dolphins also have
characteristic a streamline marine body
form they help for flippers but they
don't have hind limbs
you can see here in the skeleton
the obvious off flickr
reform remnants of the dolphin uh...
appear at the front of the body
there are no hind limbs in the skeleton
hanging beneath the vertical column
at the spot where a hinman would
normally be
you can against c these two rudimentary
bones unattached
know what's coming out
but these represent what's left of
upheld the best
uh... in this former marine mammal
that kind of rudimentary pelvis suggests
that dolphins and whales also evolved
from for liggett in land animals
if that's true
where are the transitional fossils
uh... that uh... the show those
precursors
well for man team will evolution
the uh... spectacular fossils
have also been found in the last twenty
years
this case the key fossils are located in
pakistan and egypt
forty seven million year old skeletons
have our heads that look like whales
but still have four legs with the hind
limbs as robust as the four limbs
the egyptian fossils from thirty six
million years again shows schools that
and clearly whale like
you now see that the hinman has been
extensively reduced
very small still has a policy if you
were in the lower leg bones but it's
detach from the vertebral column could
no longer support
uh... body weight
again a beautiful set of transitional
fossils from before late didn't quite
animal with the school of a whale
the partial hinman reduction
for the kind of tiny rudimentary pelvis
is that you see today
uh... you know modern bob dole from her
way up
finally large incomplete mammalian part
of the rare but an amazingly uh...
detailed fossil record exists for the
process of public reductions tickle
backs uh... we introduced the
corrections today
we'll show you a short video that
summarizes extensive uh... pairings
logical studies of the fossil record of
public reduction that have been are
carried out by mike bell
these are all based on studies of
apostle of lake site in nevada
at this site
diet com dying each year float out to
the bottom of the way
and establish these thin rocky layers
that are like growth rings in in a tree
you can actually walk through trying by
walking your way up and down the slopes
of of this quarry
or we're going to show you is i a
detailed studies
of the forms of steckel backs that are
present in one section of this quarry
represents
about twenty five thousand years of
evolution of mike's looked at in detail
at each stage you can pull out rocks
split on
uh... from macquarie it lots of
different area could calculate watch
fish were present at a given time they
come in different forms including the
complete steckel back
the palace in the spine
reduced to go back to the tiny rudiments
like you would find in a minute here
where
or an intermediate for mothers to bounce
left instead of just one
at each stage in the fossil record
you can count the fish that are seen in
the summer layer across rocks in the
quarry
and calculate what's the percentage of
the fish that are reduced
or intermediate or complete
and you can do that for successive
stages as you walk through time
so this is a summary of actual data from
our mikes lab calculating and counting
lots of different fission rocks they all
start out reduced
and then in the series at about ten
thousand years a newspaper back invades
environment replaces the the previous
form
this type of act has a complete pelvis
and a very interesting thing happens
over the next ten or fifteen thousand
years that complete form
revolves public reduction
with intermediate possibles
scene along the way
there was sorry that time series again
starts out with with
uh... population that's a hundred
percent pelvic reduced
rapid replacement around ten thousand
years new form all with the complete
post and then the real pollution
of a public
reduced phenotype
intermediate forms asking along the way
can also see that in line graph form
a blue line for the reduced form that
predominates in the early stage
a red line for the complete form the
rapidly replaces the ten thousand years
and then the real pollution and public
production within intermediate forms
summarized by the green line
a strong during the time sir
so it's remarkable
to be able to watch evolutionary change
uh... with this level of detail
you can actually watched the
morphological changes happen in
centuries rolled barley
and catch that you know intermediate
forms as a completes the go back
evolves onto a public reduce state
face a lots of people ask all the time
where are the fossils other predicted by
evolution
darman asked that question himself in
eighteen fifty nine
maybe because there was so honest about
clean out the problems with his theory
there's still a stranger urban legend or
meth
that transitional fossils had never been
found
and that this is somehow a of major
problem with evolutionary theory
so after a hundred and fifty years of
discoveries in paleontology that simply
isn't true
where are the key fossils
well for early forms of uniserial earned
multi sailor life the fossils are an
ancient greek ambien rocks of australia
for feathers there in germany
for manatees there in jamaica
for whales
they were in pakistan puget
first echo baxter in nevada
direction down many of your own
backpacks for those those students who
are participated in the fossil activity
yesterday afternoon
so the posse record actually provides
incredibly strong support for darwin's
ke idea of the sentence modification
i hope anyone who seriously interested
in this issue
we'll look at the data as it exists in
two thousand five
not as that existed in eighteen fifty
nine
including all kinds of beautiful fossil
just a small segment which we've been
able to describe
uh... in the holiday lectures
so i'll stop there it was good time for
a break and we'll take a few questions
hot track
so the plan for the complete form
complete form arise that as well
echo back so i can migrate uh... there
could've been environmental changes not
really clear well aware that stupa
backyard came from
bibd it's very clear
that the complete form arrives in the
late m all at once
uh... the
the
these structures now have the form of a
newspaper back without intermediates
along the way so that does look like a
migration or a replacement vent instead
of uh... an evolutionary event
in contrast in public of the class
reduction real balls at the site by you
clearly see the intermediate along the
way
gcc common ancestors subscribe please
send
but how many contests to think they are
or click
types for the quote word firsthand
censuses
all the different types of grimaces
today
final paragraph about darwin's book says
arm
life originally briefed by the creator
into a few simple forms or one
they so he thought that things uh...
must of gotten much simpler
was arm
he allowed the possible and not just one
of may be possible pure simple forms
what the fossil record actually shows
is very simple forms at the beginning of
the fossil record of life on earth
uh... bacteria unit sailor animal
eunice enotes a organisms
the single celled simple prokaryotic
organisms
on begin to be found also if you carry
out a organisms
then multi sailor organisms the more
complex forms
i think the key idea of a tree of life
is that things are related by dissent
with modifications
not clear if the tree has to be very
bronner very narrow
it should be simpler at the beginning
and more complex are later
that's exactly what that's exactly what
the fossil record shop
disease stossel's pieces
and signs this housing figure out how
the point of the athletes
anticipated films
so i think it's also important remember
that uh... balance there is a period
white teens
right so there aren't a whole chapters
of on darwin's book
that explain
the creation
theory where where did the universe come
from
that's not what darwin's book is about
darwin's book is about
how life
changed and how organisms are related by
descent obvious modification
i think that's a frequent confusion that
you see a lot in
debates about religion an evolution that
somehow i evolution
uh... proves that uh...
the universe was created of by some
random process
evolution describes how life changes
once life is here it's not a theory
about how life originally arose or why
the whole universe on why the whole
university says
off strained
he said
so
you know we're going to come back to
that point five during during the august
second spark here because i was actually
concede jitters thing and i'm triggers
in the fossil record of evolutionary
change
it does happen
five different rates a different time
sometimes fast sometimes slow
uh... again
there's nothing in the uh...
the theory of evolution
that says it has to be particularly fast
were particularly slow in fact we know
genetic mechanisms where major genes can
figure facts or other genes have small
facts becca create rapid evolution or
slower evolution whether there is no
uh... there's no particular rate
that evolution requires and in fact the
range of rates are seen in the fossil
record and experimental system
delivered a comeback uh...
for that to the second section happy to
take on more questions but you're in a
minute
okay so let's come back to some of these
uh... scientific debate about the way
um... selection
could or couldn't work
the um... major debates was uh...
whether natural selection would be able
to let an interesting new variant affect
uh... traits within the population
so as i said people believed in blending
inheritance of the time that works and i
was first published
the uh... problem that was pointed out
was was suppose that you know a a little
tiny
drop of black ink
appeared in wisdom dropped into a giant
bat
of all white liquid like milk
they pray drop a black ink in a giant
about of white milk has no effect
are on the overall color of the back
it's still just blended out and uh...
population would stay out predominantly
on don milky white
so it's even confusing to try to explain
because we now know so much more about
the genetic mechanisms that actually
exists that bob blendon inheritance
clearly uh... doesn't happen
your jury was written before any
detailed knowledge of genetics of those
kinds of ideas were out there
but when men those laws were
rediscovered in nineteen hundred
it was clear
that variants
just lost by blending
in fact uh...
uh... variants exist as stable are
stable genetic changes
that by insist on chromosomes
those stable variance i or sometimes
hard to see in populations bearings can
be recessive
but once a mutation arises
it can increase in frequency simply by
being transmitted out to more and more
offspring
we made extensive use of uh...
mendelssohn laws on yesterday in talking
about the genetic architecture of corn
in our case and paid evolution
stick a backup aleutian uh... and uh...
uh... uh...
evolution of color forms and rock pocket
mice
chon actually showed you
a simulation
based on mendoza lawns and population
genetics
of how a rare variant
when that appears doesn't just get
blended in
in fact a small selective advantage even
a five percent uh... increasing the
number of offspring that are surviving
reproduced from a blackberry and
will lead to a rapid increase
in the frequency of that very into
overtime
so the population level the very end
doesn't blend it appears in
fitted on generates more offspring it
will actually increasing frequency as
uh... both the white form decreases
now the state it was based on a
simulation
but i'd like to compared the results of
that stimulation
with the results of the actual frequency
of pelvic forms that are seen in the
fossil record that we just described for
public reduction in stick a black
so here
they do line graph represents
uh... the reduced form of how was
originally as a where variant
sweeps are two fixation
in other uh... the successive layers
that can be dug up out of this on my
seem like that
i hope you can see
that although this is simulated data
and this is actual data
that the form of the currents
are strikingly similar
variance don't blame and when they
appear in fact
uh... they can spread to populations
using
uh... laws of both of mendel and
population genetics that are that are
now well understood
and that are also confirm by
observations in real systems
okay finally have a this last problem
ado animals simply look to different
i've become
from coming in substance
this is again an area
the darwin tried to address uh... in the
origin
uh... he's got this passage
all living things have much in common
somewhat germinal vesicles
uh... we see this also in that the same
poison can similarly affect of both
plants and animals
or that the poison secreted on by the
golf life
uh... will produce gross both on wild
roses are or on oak trees
darwin was trying here
uh... but you can tell
this stage the knowledge of biochemistry
and molecular genetics are was so
rudimentary
that the arguments for the in a
relationship of all living forms
was still of very circumstantial
since
the origin of species
pathways for the synthesis of d_n_a_ in
our name proteins and lipids in
carbohydrates have now been worked out
in detail
turns out most bacteria plants and
animals share fundamental metabolic
pathways they all use a_t_p_ for energy
they have lots of other our bylaws kal
characteristics in common
began to take enzymes our of one
organism like a mammal mixing together
are with bacterial extracts and the
enzymes and bits and pieces
uh... from different organisms are
compatible and can capitalize on these
reactions
most importantly in one of the triumph
so thought twentieth-century biology
the molecular basis of heredity has been
worked out in detail
the structure of d_n_a_ was discovered
in nineteen fifty three
that led to the den of cation of a
universal code for converting d_n_a_
sequence into amino acids sequence and
most animals
same sorts of d_n_a_ same sort of
genetic code whether you're a virus for
a victory or a planter an insect uh...
or
amounts for human
genes from one organism can actually
replicate and function in another
a striking confirmation of the common
biochemical and genetic heritage of all
living things
finally very different looking animals
are actually built on using similar
genes in pathways
when the most striking examples of this
i was originally found in research
injure saw for the fruit fly
drosophila has a whole set of keys
developmental control genes called hox
genes
these jeans a current clusters along
chromosome
and the expression pattern of the genes
in the embryos is related to their
position on long the cluster
so the blue jeans here at the one end of
the cluster
are expressed
at the head and of the embryo that's
shown there in the bottom right
the color genes in the middle
or expressed in the middle of the embryo
and the green jeans at the end of the
cluster or expressed in the tail region
of the embryo
to those genes are just expressed the
different interior post here head to
tail compositions
there also required for the formation of
the particular tissues that you find
from the head to the table of the
adulteress awful
so if you make mutations and those jeans
you change the development of the
characteristic issues that should formal
on interposed your body except
was surprisingly although animals so it
looks very different mice looked very
different from proof lies
their interior post your body axis is
built from the very same uh... sets of
genes
so mice and humans other vertebrates
have
uh... sequences that are closely related
to these hox gene supplies
the hox genes in mammals also occurring
clusters
the clusters are also expressed in
patterns that are related to interpret
your development
blue jeans at one end of the cost of
that actually duplicated so there's more
copies in in mammals
blue jeans at the end of the clusters
are expressed in the head regions of the
embryos from
at the lower left
the middle genes are expressed in the
middle part of the embryo the green
jeans at the end of the cluster
expressed in the tail region of the
embryo
and just doesn't replies
if you make mutations in these psyche
hox genes
those mutations alter the formation of
the characteristics issues that would
normally formate each position along the
interior post here body axis of the
mouse
so it looks like
the head to tail access of animals even
the look completely different
are infected built by ancient toolkit of
these key developmental regulators
called hox genes
similar uh... toolkit jeans have been
discovered
they control a range of other structures
are in diverse organisms so the hockey
genes for the interior posterior axis
other sets of genes for the dorsal
ventral access other toolkit genes for
the left-right access
and other toolkit jeans
offer the formation of particular body
tissues
give an example of one particular tissue
arye development
so i is variation structures found in
lots of different animals
they look quite different
uh... in different animals
that's a human eye an adress offline
humanize high has single white gathering
our organ and lands
in contrast insects have these compound
eyes thousands of little
uh... like gathering organs all-women on
a little crystalline array
the histology of the eyes spot is quite
different single like gathering lens for
the marianne i in this array of on it
independent little white gathering units
in the compound diet and sex
although those eyes look very different
turns out that the same toolkit gene
is required for i develop ment in many
different organisms
so uh... this team is called pack six
can make a mutation in
one chromosome that one of the two
copies of pax six on during human
development
you begin to lose optical parts of the
eye
in particular the colored a high-risk
muscle that normally surrounds the pupil
you can see there the eye of a a patient
with
uh... defect in one copy of his packed
sixteen and that produces
uh... the absence of an iris disease
called anna radiance of the people now
nearly fills the are
similarly in the malice
mutation in one of the two copies of the
pack sixteen
parsley reduces our the size of the
i_r_a_
mutations in both copies completely
eliminate the i uh... announced on
embryo had shown at the upper right
although to sop lies with very different
than a million times
there's a similar packs sixteen in fruit
flies and if you make a mutation that
gene
you eliminate the compound by at the the
for plot
even more remarkably
if you all over express
this ki yaad developmental regulator of
ice formation
you can generate new rights issue in
completely different body parts
so this is an experiment that was done
dial by war ca walter gehring slam
taking this pack sixteen in engineering
that to be expressed
uh... during late development
united on developing fruit fly
you can see when you overexpressed of
the irate and later gene
you induce on the lake of the fruit fly
the tiny little patch of red compound i
kiss you
you do the scanning electron micrograph
that structure
had exactly the kind of independent
repeated i'll unit that you would find
in the normal fly on
and remarkably you can get that result
whether you do the experiment with the
flight pack sixteen
or
with the pack sixteen
so did we think the jeans like packed
six
are part of an ancient toolkit
that's been inherited from a common
ancestor and can be put to work to build
related structures
even in very different working animals
so how do these sorts of our master
regulators work
many of the ancient toolkit genes that
control the development of thirty people
adi access or the formation of a
particular tissue
turn out to encode gene products
that act by switching other genes
on and off
okay so for example to build an army
you have to express uh... lens proteins
and photoreceptors
the pack sixteen does
the tax
as
a regulatory molecule that flips which
is on target genes and causes things
like lens proteins and total receptors
ought to be expressed
at the site where the pack sixteen has
expressed
trevor short video about the show that
kind of a regulatory structure
so this is a gene with the yellow part
are of the d_n_a_
uh... that codeine part colored yellow
that might include something like a lens
protein
it would normally only be expressed of
an army plan race plans on the jeans
promoter and makes a messenger r_n_a_
from the gene
the coding region of the genus
surrounded by a series of regulatory
switches
so these are part of d_n_a_ that don't
co pretty protein instead
they acted switches that determine where
and when the gene turns on
those switches or the landing sites
for regulatory molecules
that bind to the switches
attorney plan raised for the jeans
promoter
and cause an increase in the total
number message or any transcript coming
from the g
typically deal be surrounded by multiple
uh... switches
that allows the gene to be turned on at
different times and places op under the
control of different signals and
regulatory molecules
a lens protein in the mouse is also
expressed in the liver for example
it might have a switch
where regulatory molecule turns it on in
the highlands
the pack sixteen is an example of a
regulatory molecule that we're going to
one of those switches there'd be a
difference which opportunity known
uh... in the liver
okay with that background on master
regulators huh let's come back up to the
problem of foreign women hinman on
development in different animals
for lender hind limbs are good examples
of structured that very indifferent
always along interposed your body axis
so four limbs in hind limbs can become
wings or legs
short legs so and hopping legs
uh... spines and finn sighed and fish
overdue brits
share
another set of toolkit amassed a
regulatory teens that are involved in
controlling the formation of hind limbs
or for land
so these are slight show a series of
chicken embryos
that had been stains
uh... with a blue died this is a method
allows you to look at where an
individual gene has been expressed race
he cites a blue with the sites where the
gene is the returning on
there's a gene called t_v_ expired
that's expressed
in the wing by the v_ chip but not the
leg
there's another gene called t_b_ exports
expressed in the hind uh... late but not
the wing
another gene called pex one that turns
on in the way
but not the way
so all vertebrates i have these master
regulatory genes are expressed in one
way or the other and help determine are
held the limbs normally form
doesn't matter whether your official
reform birth chip are or a mouse
are these genes are turned on
in out one limb structure or the other
so what's happened in organisms where
the development of one lam has been
drastically alter
so we went through yesterday the example
of completely losing the heinlein uh...
in natural populations of steckel backs
and i summarized the series of of
genetic experiments that show
that a major gene located this land of
linkage group seven controls the
presence of the absence of the pelvis in
these natural population
so it's possible to actually are also
determined the location of these toolkit
master regulators that are known to be
involved in hinman reform and
development
when you do that
turns out that one of the hinman master
regulatory laters maps exactly to the
locus that controls the presence or
absence of the hind fed
uh... in the staple backs
that gene is called the cadets one gene
one concert you're in the earlier
expressions flights as well
this gene actually plays several
different roles dog during normal
development you may wonder why it's
called pex one well in addition
uh... take normally turning on and hind
limbs but not for landsat also turns on
and some other body tissues
it turns on in the pituitary in plays an
important role in controlling pituitary
gene expression
it also turns on in on jaws the mouth
parts
if you completely eliminate the pics one
gene in a mouse
you shrink the hind limbs
but the mouse dies at birth with
pituitary abnormalities and uh... enjoy
normality screen your facial defects
in some ways it doesn't look very
promising for trying to use this gene to
evolve a new structure in our
populations that are subject to a full
range of fitness constraints in the wild
on the other hand if you look at what's
happened to the pics one gene uh... in
steckel backs
the protein coding region of the gene
has not changed at all
in marine in public reduce tickle backs
in contrast if you look at where this
toolkit gina strongly expressed in
embryos
there is an obvious difference in pex
one expression
now we're seeing blue at those sites
where the pics one gene is expressed in
either marina republic because
population
it in the marine population expression
in the blue mountains are region
but also turns on and a spot
uh... at the
site of the body where the high infant
would normally grow out
also see that from the belly of the fish
are here in the lower left how two spots
where the kremlin's would normally form
in the public reduced population
you still have normal expression in the
developing had region the mouth of the
drop parts
but at the site in the body where the
hind limb but normally form
the pics one gene i'm normally no longer
terms on in that location
so what do we think it's happening all
that summarized
uh... in the final brief animation
the marine and the pelvic reduced
population have apec's one locus
the coding region of the gene is still
intact in both population
this gene we think it's surrounded by a
series of these regulatory switches the
cause of turned on in specific body
parts like the chart the pituitary or
behind them
in both populations
some of those switches are still present
in function normally
so genes expressed normally in the mouth
parts
you still build normal nelson johnson
both populations
still expressed in the pituitary still
for normal to terry in both organisms
in the marine population it turns on and
the highland menu bill the pelvis
in the reduced population
the hind limb control switch
has been inactivated
you no longer express the pics one gene
at that point patient and as a result
the hind limb fails to form
uh... in the fish
okay you'll hear from shawn did similar
tweaking with these switches that
surround jeans
rides a very flexible method for
evolution to use
the create major changes morphological
changes in particular body regions but
still preserve on the overall viability
of the coding region in the expression
of the teens
uh... in other tissues
okay i've gone through on them reduction
in some detail they think it's a great
sort of trade it's evolved out
repeatedly in lots of different animals
sigs ample of 'em on sort of macro
evolutionary change that scene in wales
manatees
and so it kind of trade now or
evolutionary studies have made it
possible
to document major morphological change
that occurs and nationally anchoring
species
to trace those changes out through the
fossil record
to track down the number in the location
of the chromosome regions that control
the morphological differences
to identify specific genes that normally
build a corresponding morphological
structure
and the study how those genes have
changed uh... in natural population
so we now know a lot more
about the detail molecular mechanisms to
control the sports traits and we did at
the time the darwin road
but the details in the additional data
become for many fields all support the
key original idea of dissent with
modifications
that's exactly are what supposed to
happen
but the good scientific theory
science should fundamentally both
explain existing data and make
predictions
as we've seen darwin predicted
that the earth must be old
the transitional fossils must have
existed in the past
that variance must be able to arise in
spread to populations
and that very different organisms uh...
must be related to one another
every one of those predictions has been
resoundingly confirmed by all kinds of
independent data
from physics
from geology from paleontology from
genetics from biochemistry
from molecular biology in from
embryology
that's why evolution is regarded as a
well-established backed by scientists
and that's why uh... we considered a key
organizing principle for understanding
paula biology
and into relationships uh... between
living forms
so i'll stop there and i'd be happy to
answer questions
strike
fetuses
seat
there is
lots of different mechanisms that can
alter d_n_a_ sequence shawn mentioned
single base pair changes that can occur
are by heirs of replication during
ourselves so cell replication
that occurs randomly and will just alter
individual base pairs
there's also transpose of oil moments
that will hop around
there's also a gene duplication of ends
to take place in fact we now have genome
sequences of lots of different animals
and you can see
household gene sections
i have been duplicated creating a new
regions we think that
those kinds of mechanisms
provide uh... a flexible bases of
generating the kinds of genetic
variation
that underlies
uh... the things that evolution can do
to produce a new alterations in
morphology
just over one side of the room gap
no
swoon
slams shut
house remarkably arm the extract spot is
actually interpreted
and if you shine light
on the lake of the fly
and report from the neurons that project
that a topic i passed
they respond to the light
so uh... it's a remarkably
so my functional alive
uh... that not only has the right lens
proteins and photoreceptors but actually
is innovative will respond lightened
stimulate electrical activity
invented last the teacher here
that starts you senseless last address
domestic three shahrukh
and i was just wondering why
so many religious
six years that religious andrew groups
of people are going to see the sketch
reacts negatively darwin's theories ego
he clearly or at least protected to
clearly still believes
actress act
who will talk more about that the second
noon i think the point i'd like to make
is
and in fact on
most major religious groups in the world
don't see a conflict uh... between i
evolution and religion
uh... including the pope himself
uh... who
looks at the same day that i summarized
here and says this is an independent our
data that overwhelmingly supports
uh... the theory of evolution
is not a conflict between the idea
that life
has been
modified
generated uh... by a process uh...
evolution and the central modification
that's a separate issue from where the
universal originally came from
and what set everything off at the
beginning vital also doesn't say
how god created to act
union says
all came from dot
so it's not so different
then uh... you know on evolutionary
model where from very simple beginnings
of life forms are generated by descent
modification
ho
side aspect in this town
the decisions
the
lisa
see you soon
dozens of small sources so you've got
some
uses
that's actually why that gap apostle
record existed for a long time cuz i
wasn't sure how to recognize that early
forms of of life on earth
one of the uh... the real breakthroughs
came from a realization that sometimes
the single cell micro-organisms
two million large maps so you can
actually see this today off the western
coast of australia there's these
structures called str mandalite hons
strata light like structure was his big
map like forms of spy in a bacteria
that all form and their big enough that
they actually make uh... giant kind of
mushrooms just full of off hold back
three
so those forms can be seen today and
those of the structures that were first
recognized in in the fossil record very
similar sorts of accumulation incredibly
high density all lay down in little
chains and maps just like you would see
today in in a modern structure awful
australia these bacteria still exist in
the world today
and they can be recognized in the fossil
record originally
because of that unusual
island group b_ two of them and then
once i was clear that those things
existed you could begin looking for more
and more rocks said had the
characteristics that they would have
been laid down in the kind of nearshore
environments where those structures
reform
this is my last teacher but i hope that
doesn't mean the end of the question
pge
past possibly axis
exchanges struts jsp kids
so there's lots of work for new ideas
eases breakout there's lots of questions
about where the disease organisms liking
problem
so that's looked at by sequence in the
virus in trying to see how it's related
to the other known viruses uh... as
patients are treated with drugs
viral resistance for drug-resistant
forms of the virus will emerge within
the body dramatic example of evolution
occurring in medicine
again if you sequence the genome of the
virus is that have emerged in a patient
that's being treated with drugs you can
see individual based care changes that
have occurred within the virus they're
part of the evolution of are drug
resistant
some fact the strategies the doctors use
to try to suppress of viral infections
are heavily based on the idea of trying
to minimize the chance that by were
resistant forms
uh... will pop out and spread the best
way to do that is to treat patients with
multiple drugs simultaneously so that
even if a single bass pro change occurs
there some other drug that is inhibiting
multiple parts the virus independently
and keeps the infections on spa stamp
okay thanks very much as were great
questions and i'll turn things back over
at the top
thank you david kingsley for an
outstanding talk
we're going to break now for
half-an-hour when we return sean carroll
well conclude our journey of evolution
by talking about human fossils and also
human genetics